# 4.4 Fundamental groups of polyhedra

In this subsection, we will hopefully develop a systematic way of computing the fundamental groups of triangulable topological space $X$ by considering the fundamental group of the polyhedron $K$ corresponding to it. Some algebraic structure will be introduced first.

>**Definitions in advance**: Free group, relations; edge path, edge loop, edge group, tree.

## Free groups and relations

Recall our definitions of free Abelian group. However, here the modifier "Abelian" is emitted, and we will employ multiplicative notation for the group operation.

>**Definition (Free group)**: A subset $X=\\{x_j\\}$ of group $G$ is called a free set of generators of $G$ if $\forall g\in G-\\{e\\}$ is *uniquely* written as
>$$g=x^{i_1}_1\cdots x^{i_n}_n$$
>where $n$ is finite and $i_k\in \mathbb{Z}$.

Some grammars:
>**Definition (letter, word)**: $G$ is a group whose generators form a set $X$. $x_i\in X$ is called a *letter*, and a *word* is the product of letters 
>$$w=x_1^{i_1}x_2^{i_2}\cdots x_n^{i_n}$$
>where $x_j\in X$ and $i_j\in \mathbb{Z}$. If $i_j\neq 0$ and $x_i\neq x_j$, then a word becomes a *reduced word*.

We can check the grammar with several examples.

Along with the empty word 1, we can construct a well-defined free group generated by $X$ denoted by $F[X]$. The multiplication is the juxtaposition of two words followed by reduction.

>**Claim**: A group $G$ is uniquely specified by its generators and a set of *relations*.

>**Definition (relation)**: Let $\\{x_k\\}$ be a set of generators of group $G$, the *relations* are written as 
>$$r=\sum_jx_{k_j}^{i_j}=1$$

Then, there is a natural homomorphism $\phi$ from $F[X]$ onto $G$
$$\varphi: x_1^{i_1}x_2^{i_2}\cdots x_n^{i_n}\longrightarrow x_1^{i_1}x_2^{i_2}\cdots x_n^{i_n} \in G$$
Since we have the fundamental theorem of homomorphism:
$$F[X]/\text{ker} \varphi\cong G$$
which illustrates that a group $G$ can be presented by its generators and relations
$$(x_1,\cdots x_p; r_1, \cdots r_q)$$
which is called the presentation of $G$.

>**Definition (commutator subgroup)**: Given a group $G$ and its representation $(x_i;r_m)$. The commutator subgroup is defined as a group generated by the elements of the form $x_ix_jx_i^{-1}x_j^{-1}$. Thus, $G/F$ is a group generated by $\\{x_j\\}$ with the set of relations $\\{r_m\\}$ and $\\{x_ix_jx_i^{-1}x_j^{-1}\\}$.

## Calculating fundamental groups of polyhedra

We have developed the fundamental group as a very useful topological invariant and further constructed an equivalence relation out of this idea. However, calculating this group seems to be disturbing as shown in previous sections. In this section, we will try to focus on the triangulable spaces, i.e. we can transform the problem into calculating the fundamental groups of polyhedra. Hopefully, we will be able to obtain a systematic method.

Given a triangulable space $X$, and the corresponding polyhedron $|K|$. Then $\pi_1(X)=\pi_1(|K|)$.

>**Definition (edge path)**: Given a simplicial complex $K$, set the sequences $v_0v_1\cdots v_k$ of vertices of $|K|$, in which $v_iv_{i+1}$ is a 0- or 1-simplex of $|K|$. Then these sequences are called *edge paths*. Specially, when $v_0=v_k$, this becomes an *edge loop*.

>**Claim**: Edge loops can be divided into equivalence class under the equivalence relation:
>
>$\alpha\sim \beta$ if $\alpha$ can be transformed into $\beta$ under the following operations in finte times
>$\exists u, v, w$ span a 2-simplex in $K$, the edge path $uvw$ can be replaced by $uw$ and vice verse.

>**Definition (edge group)**: The equivalence classes of loops at $v$ form a group $E(K;v)$ under the product operation
>$$\\{vu_1\cdots u_{k-1}v\\} \ast \\{vv_1\cdots v_{k-1}v\\}=\\{vu_1\cdots u_{k-1}vv_1\cdots v_{k-1}v\\}$$
>This group is called the *edge group*.

>**Theorem**: $$E(K;v)\cong \pi_1(|K|;v)$$

Now, we are trying to find a simplicial subcomplex $L$ of $K$ such that
1. $L$ contains all the vertices of $K$;
2. the polyhedron $|L|$ is arcwise connected and simply connected.

This $L$ will later be proved to exist for all arcwise connected simplicial complex $K$. We now try to find such an $L$ using the idea of *maximal tree*.

>**Definition (tree, maximal tree)**: A one-dimensional simplicial complex that is arcwise connected and simply connected is called a *tree*. A tree $T_M$ is called a *maximal tree* of $K$ if it is not a proper set of any other trees.

Suppose we now have the subcomplex $L$. We are not interested in the structure of $|L|$ since it is simply connected. Now we assign an 'object' $g_{ij}$ to each oriented 1-simplex of $K$, which satisfies the relations
1. If $\langle v_i v_j\rangle\in L$, $g_{ij}=1$.
2. If $v_iv_jv_k$ is a 2-simplex in $K$, then $g_{ij}g_{jk}g_{ki}=1$.

$\\{g_{ij}\\}$ defined above generate a group with the relations (1.\&2.), denoted by $G(K;L)$.

>**Theorem**: $G(K;L)$ is isomorphic to $E(K;v)\cong \pi_1(|K|;v)$.

>**Lemma**: A maximal tree $T_M$ of simplicial complex $K$ contains all 0-simplexes of $K$.

Several examples are presented in our textbook $\dots$

Now we have a standard procedure to compute the fundamental group of a triangulabel topological space
1. First, we want to find the exact trianglation $f: |K|\to X$.
2. Then, find the subcomplex $L$ that satisfies the conditions given before (simply connected and contains all vertices of $K$).
3. Denote each 1-simplex $\big<v_iv_j \big>$ with $g_{ij}$ as A generator.
4. Impose the relations for $\big<v_iv_j \big>$ of $L$ and 2-simplexes of $K$.
5. Compute the group $G(K;L)$, which is isomorphic to the fundamental group $\pi_1(X)$.

We can try our procedure on several examples.

### Fundamental group of $S^n$

From our derivation before, we haven't actually used any information other than the 0-, 1- and 2-simplexes of a simplicial complex. Thus, we define those simplexes to form a **2-skeleton** of $K$, denoted by $K^{(2)}$ we should have
$$\pi_1(|{K}|)=\pi_1(|K^{(2)}|)$$
We can check for any $(n+1)$-simplex $\sigma_{n+1}$, there exists the relation $\pi_1(\sigma_{n+1})=\pi_1(\partial\sigma_{n+1})$ (because they have the same 2-skeleton). Since the boundary of a contractible $(n+1)$-simplex is a triangulation of $S^{n}$, we have
$$\pi_1(S^n)\cong \\{e\\} \text{for}\ n\geq 2$$

### An $n$-buoquet 
$$\pi_1(3-\text{buoquet})=G(K;L)=(x,y,x;\emptyset)$$

### Torus, Klein bottle and projective plane

## Relations between $H_1(K)$ and $\pi_1(|{K}|)$

We have seen that in a lot of examples, the first homology group $H_1(K)$ coincides with the fundamental group $\pi_1(|{K}|$, such as $S^n$, torus, disc and many more. However, in other cases like $n$-buoquet, they are different. Now we introduce a theorem about their relations.

>**Theorem**: Let $K$ be a connected simplicial complex, and $F$ be a commutator subgroup of $\pi_1(|K|)$, then we have
>$$H_1(K)\cong \pi_1(|K|)/F$$

This theorem states that if $\pi_1(|K|)\cong (x_i;r_m)$, then $H_1(K)\cong (x_i;r_m,x_ix_jx_i^{-1}x_j^{-1})$. We can check back in the examples that the extra relations appear when computing the first homology group.
