# 4.8 Orders in condensed matter systems

## 4.8.1 Order parameter
**Spontaneous symmetry breakdown**: Assume the the hamiltonian of a system $H$ is invariant under a certain symmetry operation.  The ground state of the system need not preserve the symmetry of $H$.

---
An example -- *Heisenberg Hamiltonian*:
$$H=-J\sum_{(i,j)}\vec{S}_i\cdot\vec{S}_j+\vec{h}\cdot\sum_i \vec{S}_i.$$
The $\vec{S}_i$ are ferromagnetic Heisenberg spins and $J=\text{const}>0$. The summation is over the pair of the nearest-neighbour sites $(i,j)$ and $\vec{h}$ is the uniform external magnetic field. *Note that we are talking about quantum mechanics so $H$ here is an operator*.

The *partition function* is $Z\equiv\text{tr}\left(\text{e}^{-\beta H}\right)=\sum_i \text{e}^{-\beta E_i}$ where $\beta=1/T$ is the inverse temperature and $E_i$ are eigenvalues of $H$. The *free energy* is defined by $\exp(-\beta F)=Z$. The average magnetization per spin is defined as:
$$\vec{m}\equiv\frac{1}{N}\sum_{i}\langle\vec{S}_i\rangle=\frac{1}{N\beta}\frac{\partial F}{\partial \vec{h}}$$
where $\langle\dots\rangle\equiv\text{tr}\left(\dots \text{e}^{-\beta H}\right)/Z$ can be interpreted to be the expectation value.

In the limit $\vec{h}\rightarrow 0$ ($H\rightarrow -J\sum_{(i,j)}\vec{S}_i\cdot\vec{S}_j$), $H$ is invariant under $\text{SO}(3)$ but $\vec{m}$ doesn't vanish because of the ferromagnetism. It is said that the system exhibits **spontaneous magnetization**.

*In this example*, the vector $\vec{m}$ is called the **order parameter** describing the phase transition between the ordered state and the disordered state.

---
The free energy of a system is defined by
$$F=\langle H\rangle-TS.$$
$S$ is entropy and equilibrium is obtained by minimizing $F$.

When temperature is low, $F\approx\langle H\rangle$. All $S_i$ align in the same direction.

When temperature is high, $F\approx-TS$. All $S_i$ are totally random.

---

In the Heisenberg Hamiltonian example, when the temperature is uniform, $|\vec{m}(\vec{x})|$ is constant so $\vec{m}$ can be characterized by polar coordinates $(\theta,\phi)$ on $S^2$. Now we have a map $\vec{m}: \vec{x}\rightarrow\vec{m}(\vec{x})$ or $\mathbb{R}^3\rightarrow S^2$.

The excited states of this system depend on this map $\vec{m}$ (in other systems, the order parameter may be not a vector). Now we make a generalization to all systems that these kinds of excitation depends on the topological arguments are called **topological excitations**.

## 4.8.2 Superfluid $^4$He and superconductors

The order parameter of  <sup>4</sup>He is the expectation value:
 $$\langle\phi(\vec{x})\rangle=\Psi(\vec{x})=\Delta_0 (\vec{x})\text{e}^{i\alpha(\vec{x})}$$

---
In the BCS theory of superconductors, the order parameter is given by:
 $$\psi_{\alpha\beta}\equiv\langle\psi_\alpha(\vec{x})\psi_\beta(\vec{x})\rangle.$$
We can see that the order parameter may even not be a scalar

## 4.8.3 General consideration

The order parameter of a 3D superconductor is $\psi(x)=\Delta_0(\vec{x})\text{e}^{i\phi(\vec{x})}$. When a homogeneous system is under uniform external conditions, $\Delta_0$ is a constant. So $\psi(x)\cong\text{U(1)}$.

We call the collection of order parameter values the **order parameter space** $M$. For superconductor, $M=\text{U(1)}$ and for nematic liquid crystal $M=\mathbb{R}P^2$.

---
There are cases that the order parameter takes value outside $M$ (inhomogeneous state), but we still assume order parameters take value in $M$ when the scale of the system is large enough.

 However, there are also some points, lines or surfaces where the order parameters may not be defined uniquely. We call them **point defects (monopoles), line defects (vortices) and surface defects (domain walls)**

---
Consider a system, the order parameter is a classical field $\psi(x)$ and it can be regarded as a map $\psi:X\rightarrow M$.

Imagine there is a line defect. We enclose it by a circle $S^1$ and pick a reference point $x_0$ on it. Thus, we just defined a loop $S^1\rightarrow M$. Recall from the homotopy group, we can now classify this loop according to the homotopy class they belong to.

For example, for superconductor $M=\text{U(1)}$ and $\pi_1\left(\text{U(1)},x_0\right)\cong\mathbb{Z}$. So it's possible to assign an integer to each loop and we call it the **winding number** of the loop.

---
We can also generlize to other kinds of defects.

First, pick

 ## References
 1. Some useful information on Wikipedia: [Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spontaneous_symmetry_breaking); [Phase Transition and Order Parameter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_transition); [Topological Excitations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_excitations); [BCS Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BCS_theory).