# 7.1, 7.2: Introduction to Riemann Geometry

>**Prerequisite**: differential manifold, smooth tensors fields, manifolds with boundary, oriented manifold, submanifold, partitioning of unity, differential forms.

## Riemann Metric

Now we shall start focusing on a special differential manifold, which is equipped with extra differential structure and is widely used in aspects of physics and pure mathematics. 

>**Definition (Riemann metric)**: Given an $n$-dimensional smooth manifold $M$, assume there exists a symmetric, definite and smooth tensor field $g$ of type $(0,2)$. Or $g$ can be equivalently expressed as $\forall x\in M$, there exists a inner product on the tangent space $T_xM$ $$g_x(\cdot,\cdot):T_xM\times T_xM \to \mathbb{R}$$
>which satisfies
> 1. (linearity)
> 
> 2. (symmetry)
> 
> 3. (definity)

>**Note**: 
>  (1) By smooth, we mean the tensor field $g$ has smooth components at any local chart $(U,\phi;x_i)$.
> $$g_{ij}=g_x\left(\frac{\partial}{\partial x^i},\frac{\partial}{\partial x^j}\right)$$
> and $g_{ij}$ is symmetric
> 
>  (2) Proof of the existence of such a metric: Given a smooth manifold satisfying the second axiom of countability, there exists a Riemann metric (using the partitioning of unity).

>**Definition (length of a curve)**: Given a smooth curve $\gamma$ on $M$, $\gamma: [a,b]\to M$. Define the length of the curve 
>$$L(\gamma)=\int_a^b|\gamma'(t)|\mathrm{d} t=\int_a^b\sqrt{g_{ij}(\gamma(t))\frac{\mathrm{d} x^i}{\mathrm{d} t}\frac{\mathrm{d} x^j}{\mathrm{d} t}}\mathrm{d} t$$
>where $x^i=x^i(t)$ is the parametrized expression of the curve.

We naturally want our definition of length of a curve to be quantity at large scale, i.e. which should not be affected by change of coordinates. Thus, we introduce the following claim.

>**Claim**: $L(\gamma)$ is independent of the choice of the coordinates.
>
>**Proof**: 


>**Definition (volume of an area)**: Given an oriented Riemann manifold $(M,g)$, an orientation-consistent atlas $\\{(U_\alpha;x^i_\alpha):\alpha\in I\\}$. Which gives
>$$g\big|_{U_\alpha}=g_{ij}^\alpha\mathrm{d} x_\alpha^i\otimes\mathrm{d} x^j_\alpha$$
>Then define the volume element of Riemann manifold $(M,g)$
>$$\mathrm{d} V_M\big|_{U_\alpha}=\sqrt{\det (g_{ij}^\alpha)}\mathrm{d} x^1_\alpha\wedge\cdots\wedge \mathrm{d} x^n_\alpha$$


>**Claim**: The $n$-form $\mathrm{d} V_M$ is a quantity independent of the choice of coordinates. When $M$ is compact
>$$|M|\equiv \int_M\mathrm{d} V_M=\text{vol}(M)$$
>which is the volume of $M$.
>
>**Proof**:
