# 7.3 Curvature and torsion

## 7.3.1 Definitions

Our goal in this part is to find some _instrinsic geometrical quantities_ of a Riemannian manifold.

>**Definition (torsion and Riemann curvature tensor)**: The torsion tensor $T$ is defined as $\mathcal{X}(M)\otimes \mathcal{X}(M)\to \mathcal{X}(M)$ and the Riemann curvature tensor is defined as $R: \mathcal{X}(M)\otimes\mathcal{X}(M)\otimes\mathcal{X}(M)\to \mathcal{X}(M)$ by
>$$T(X,Y)\equiv \nabla_XY-\nabla_YX-\[X,Y\]$$
>$$R(X,Y,Z)\equiv \nabla_X\nabla_Y Z-\nabla_Y\nabla_X Z-\nabla_{[X,Y]}Z$$

It is not hard to check that the torsion and Riemann curvature tensor satisfy the following properties
1. $T(X,Y)=-T(Y,X)$ and $R(X,Y)Z=-R(Y,X)Z$.
2. $R(X,Y,Z)$ and $T(X,Y)$ are tensors (sounds trivial), i.e. they are $\mathcal{F}$-mutilinear for $X,Y$ and $Z$.
3. The components of the torsion tensor and curvature tensor can be written in terms of the connection coefficient $\Gamma_{\mu\nu}^\\lambda$.


## 7.3.2 Geometrical meanings

A heuristic idea of the geometrical side of curvature is that whether a vector agrees at the same point for different parallel transport, namely, whether the parallel transport depends on the path.

>**Claim**: Given $(M,g)$ as a Riemannian manifold, $\forall x,y \in M$, the parallel transport of vector $X\in \mathcal{x}(M)$ from $x$ to $y$ is independent of the path, then the curvature is always zero.

Before proving this claim, which is not very complicated though, we can check on an example of infinitesimal parallelograms.
 
 


We then turn to the proof of the claim.

**Proof**: Given two curved $\gamma(t)$ and $\tilde{\gamma}(\tau)$ connecting $x,y\in M$, and $\gamma(a)=\tilde{\gamma}(a)=x$, $\gamma(b)=\tilde{\gamma}(b)=y$. Define $X\equiv\dot{\gamma}(t)$, $Y\equiv \dot{\tilde{\gamma}}(\tau)$. Assume $Z\in \mathcal{X}(M)$ is parallel transported along both curves. Locally at the neighborhood of $x$, we have
$$\nabla_{\dot{\gamma}(a)}Z=\nabla_XZ(x)=0,\quad \nabla_{\dot{\tilde{\gamma}}(a)}Z=\nabla_YZ(x)=0$$
The curvature tensor at $x$ reads
$$R(X,Y,Z)(x)=(\nabla_X\nabla_YZ-\nabla_Y\nabla_XZ-\nabla_{\[X,Y\]}Z)(x)$$


Again consider the infinitesimal parallelogram for the geometrical meaning of the torsion tensor.

>**Definition (parallelizable)**: An $m$-dim manifold $M$ is said to be **parallelizable** if there exist $m$ linearly independent vector fields on $M$ globally.

Some examples of parallelizable manifolds are $S^m$ when $m=1,4,7$, and Lie groups.

## 7.3.3 The Ricci tensor and scalar curvature

>**Definition (Ricci tensor, scalar curvature)**: The Ricci tensor is defined as a tensor of type $(0,2)$ satisfying
>$$Ric(X,Y)\equiv \big<\mathrm{d}x^\mu,R(e_\mu,Y,X)\big>$$
Or more frequently in physics we use its component form
$$R_{\mu\nu}\equiv Ric_{\mu\nu}=Ric(e_\mu,e_\nu)=R^\lambda_{\mu\lambda\nu}$$
And the scalar is again one more contraction of the Ricci tensor
$$\mathcal{R}\equiv g^{\mu\nu}Ric(e_\mu,e_\nu)=R_{\mu\nu}$$


