# 7.4 Levi-Civita connections

The connection of the most interest in Riemann geometry, especially in the application of physics, is of course Levi-Civita connection. In this subsection, we will discuss more details about this connection and the geodesic equation defined in terms of this connection. As the special emphasis paid on ideal in ring theory or normal subgroup in group theory, we usually give special attention to geodesics and curvature in Riemannian manifolds.

## 7.4.1 The fundamental theorem

Recall the definition of the _affine connection_ in Sec. 7.2.2:
$$\begin{align}
    \nabla_X(Y+Z)&=\nabla_X Y+\nabla_X Z\notag\\\\
    \nabla_{(X+Y)}Z&=\nabla_{X}Z+\nabla_Y Z\notag\\\\
    \nabla_{(fX)}Y&=f\nabla_{X}Y\notag\\\\
    \nabla_X (fY)&=X[f]Y+f\nabla_X Y\notag
\end{align}$$

>**Definition (Levi-Civita connection)**: An affine connection $\nabla$ is called a Levi-Civita connection if
>1. It is compatible with the metric $g$, i.e.
>$$\nabla_X\big<Y,Z\big>=X\big<Y,Z\big>=\big<\nabla_XY,Z\big>+\big<Y,\nabla_XZ\big>$$
>2. It is symmetric
>$$\nabla_XY-\nabla_YX-[X,Y]=0$$
>The Levi-Civita connection defined from above is unique for given (pseudo-)Riemannian manifolds.

**Proof of the uniqueness**: From condition 1 in the definition
$$\frac{\partial g_{ij}}{\partial x^k}=\Gamma_{ki}^lg_{li}+\Gamma_{kj}^lg_{il}$$
Rotate the subscripts and we will have (where the torsion-free condition is applied)
$$\Gamma_{ij}^k=\frac{1}{2}g^{kl}\left(\partial_jg_{li}+\partial_ig_{lj}-\partial_lg_{ij}\right)$$


## 7.4.3 Geodesics

In terms of the Levi-Civita connections, we are able to give geodesics as both the "straightest possible" and "shortest possible" curve between two points.

First let us introduce the idea of length in curved space before discussing about the "shortest possible" curve.

>**Definition (proper length)**: The (proper) length of a path $c$ connecting two points $p$ and $q$ is 
>$$I(c)=\int_c\mathrm{d}s=\int_c\sqrt{g_{\mu\nu}\dot{x}^{\mu}\dot{x}^\nu}\mathrm{d}s$$
>where $\dot{x}^\mu=\mathrm{d}x^\mu/\mathrm{d}s$. We can check that this quantity is actually coordinate-independent.

We now give two different definitions of the geodesics and later show that they actually coincide under Levi-Civita connection.

>**Straightest possible curve**: As we have seen in Sec. 7.2.3, given a curve $c(t), t\in I$ on $M$ and its tangent vector $V(t)$, $c(t)$ is a geodesic only when
>$$\nabla_VV=0, \quad\forall t\in I$$
>which gives
>$$\frac{\mathrm{d}^2c^\mu(t)}{\mathrm{d}t^2}+\Gamma_{\nu\lambda}^\mu\frac{\mathrm{d}c^\nu}{\mathrm{d}t}\frac{\mathrm{d}c^\lambda}{\mathrm{d}t}=0$$

>**Shortest possible curve**: As the definition of the proper length shows, we can take the variation of the length to be zero (Euler-Lagrange equation). Here a little trick is applied to simplifed the calculation.



## 7.4.4 The normal coordinate system



## 7.4.5 Riemann curvature tensor with Levi-Civita connection
