# 3.3 Homology groups of simplicial complexes

<a href="//pdfcrowd.com/url_to_pdf/?width=210mm&height=297mm"
   onclick="if(!this.p)href+='&url='+encodeURIComponent(location.href);this.p=1">Download PDF
   <i class="fa fa-file-pdf-o" style="font-size:24px;color:red"></i>
</a>

This chapter focuses on developing an algebraic representation of a topological spaces, originated from the idea of finding topological invariants.

>*Some definitions we will soon encounter: 
$r$-chain group $C_r(K)$, $r$-cycle group $Z_r(K)$, $r$-boundary group $B_r(K)$; homology group $H_r(K)$.
*

!> **Notice** If your device can't render this page properly, please download the PDF file.
## 3.3.1 Oriented simplexes

## 3.3.2 Chain group, cycle group and boundary group

>**Definition (Chain group)**: Given $I_r$ $r$-simplexes from a simplicial complex $K$ that are *linearly independent*, those simplexes generate a free Abelian group $C_r(K)$ called the **$r$-chain group**, denoted by $C_r(K)$, and the elements of this group are called $r$-chains $c\in C_r(K)$.

>**Tips**: In defining the chain group, we have to choose the simplexes in $K$ as oriented, so that the inverse of an $r$-chain is well defined and is still an $r$-chain.

We can see instantly from the definition that an arbitrary element $c\in C_r(K)$ can be written as the linear combination of the generators, i.e. 
$$c=\sum_{i=1}^{I_r}c_i \sigma_{r,i}, \quad c_i\in \mathbb{Z}$$
where $\sigma_{r,i}$ denotes for the generators.

> **Q**: Is an $r$-chain a simplex?

> **Definition (Boundary operator)**: An operator $\partial_r$ acting on an $r$-simplex $\sigma_r$ is defined as
>$$\partial_r\sigma_r\equiv\sum_{i=0}^r(-1)^i(p_0 p_1\cdots\hat{p}_i\cdots p_r)$$
>where $\hat{p}_i$ means that the $i$-th element is emitted.

See several examples for the validity of this definition.

The boundary operator can further act on an $r$-chain, which is defined naturally as
$$ \partial_r c=\sum_i c_i\partial_r\sigma_{r,i}$$
Thus, the operator $\partial_r$ gives a homomorphism between $C_r(K)$ to $C_{r-1}(K)$. The kernel and image of such a homomorphism is of great importance.

> **Definition ($r$-cycle group)**: The kernel of boundary operator $\partial_r$ is called the $r$-cycle group, denoted by $Z_r(K)$, and its elements are called $r$-cycles.

Obviously, an $r$-cycle is an extension of the notion "cycle".

> **Definition ($r$-boundary group)**: The image of boundary operator $\partial_{r+1}$ is called an $r$-boundary group, denoted by $B_r(K)$.

From lemma 3.1, we find that $Z_r(K)$ and $B_r(K)$ are both subgroups of $C_r(K)$. We will further find out the relation between those two groups.

> **Lemma of boundary operator**: The composite map $\partial_r \circ\partial_{r+1}$ is a zero map.
> 
> **Proof**: Shut up and calculate!

From the lemma, we can easily prove the following theorem.

>**Theorem 3.3** Let $Z_r(K)$ and $B_r(K)$ be the $r$-cycle group and $r$-boundary group of $C_r(K)$. Then we have
>$$B_r(K)\subset Z_r(K)\subset C_r(K)$$
>
>**Proof**: From lemma given above, $\forall b\in B_r(K)$, $\partial_r b=0$, i.e. $b\in Z_r(K)$. Then $B_r(K)\subset Z_r(K)$.

Back to the figure given before, this theorem coincides with our geometric intuition.

## 3.3.3 Homology groups


Remember, our goal is to find a topological invariant that might be as gorgeous as such a group structure on the topological space.

>**Definition (Homology group)**: As before ($K, Z_r(K), B_r(K)$, the $r$-th homology group is defined as 
>$$H_r(K)\equiv Z_r(K)/B_r(K)$$
>With possible ranges of the coefficient domain, we can write this group as $H_r(K;\mathbb{Z}), H_r(K;\mathbb{R}), H_r(K;\mathbb{Z}_2)$.

The elements in such a group are of course equivalence classes:
$$H_r(K)\equiv \\{[z]|Z\in z\in Z_r(K)\\}$$
The equivalence classes are called homology classes. Two elements $z$ and $z'$ are homologous if they satisfy $z\sim z'$ or $[z]=[z']$.

>**Theorem 3.4**: Homology groups are topological invariants.


## 3.3.4 Computation of $H_{0}(K)$

>**Theorem 3.5.** Let $K$ be a connected simplicial complex. Then
>$$H_0 (K)\cong\mathbb{Z}$$
>
>**Proof** 
>$$\begin{align}[z]=\left[\sum_i n_i p_i\right]&=\sum_i n_i [p_i]=\sum_i n_i [p_1]\\&=\left[\left(\sum_i n_i\right)p_1\right] \end{align}$$
>If $\sum_i n_i=0$, then $[z]=[0]\Rightarrow z\sim0\Rightarrow z-0=z\in B_0 \left(K\right)$, namely (May be a typo here on the book)

## 3.3.5 More homology computations

## Questions

>**Question 1**
>In the **Definition 3.5.**, we see the $r$th homology group is defined by $H_{r}(K)\equiv Z_{r}(K)/B_{r}(K)$. But from the definition of [quotient group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quotient_group), if the quotient space $H_{r}(K)$ can be called "a group", $B_{r}(K)$ has to be a [normal subgroup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_subgroup). How to prove it?


## **References**
1. For detailed information about the homology group defined with different types of coeffcients, see [this wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_coefficient_theorem)
