## 5.1 Manifolds

Now we are going to study topological spaces with extra differential structures. In topology, what we have defined are all based on *continuity*, while in the theory of manifold, our key interest is the differentiability, or further *smoothness*.

The outline of this chapter:
1. Definition and differential structure on manifolds.
2. Differential operators on manifolds.
3. Differential forms and integration.
4. Lie group and Lie algebra.
5. Lie groups on the manifolds.

### 5.1.1 Heuristic introduction

In short, an $n$-dim manifold is a topological space which looks like $\mathbb{R}^n$ *locally*.

### 5.1.2 Definitions

>**Definition (manifold)**: $M$ is an $n$-dim manifold if
> 1. $M$ is a Hausdorff topological space.
> 2. $M$ is equipped with an extra structure $\\{(U_i,\phi_i)\\}$, which satisfies that $\\{U_i\\}$ covers $M$ ($\cup_i U_i=M$) and $\phi_i: U_i\to U'_i\subset \mathbb{R}^n$ is a diffeomorphism.
> 3. Given $U_i\cap U_j\neq \emptyset$, the map $\psi_{ij}\equiv \phi_i\circ \phi_j^{-1}: \phi_i(U_i\cap U_j)\to \phi_j(U_i\cap U_j)$ is a $C^{r}$ function. 

The above definition gives an $n$-dim $C^r$ manifold $M$. If $r=0$, then $M$ is a *topological manifold*. If $r=\infty$, then $M$ is said to be a *smooth manifold*. In physics, what we are interested in are always smooth manifolds, so without explicit statement, our manifolds are all smooth.
 
Furthur, the "extra structure" $\\{(U_i,\phi_i)\\}$ given in the definition is called the **atlas** of the manifold and one single element of this set $(U_i,\phi_i)$ is called a **chart**. $\phi_i$ is called the **coordinate function** or sometimes referred to as just the **coordinate**. The coordinate can also be expressed as $n$ functions $\\{x^1(p),x^2(p),\cdots,x^n(p)\\}$, and the set $\\{x^\mu(p)\\}$ can also be called the **coordinate**. However, a point $p\in M$ should be independent of our choice of the coordinate, which is shown exactly by the third condition in the definition, where two coordinates at $p\in M$ are **$C^r$-connected** with each other.

>**Note**:
>In later discussions, we may often encouter the statement that a geometrical quantity is "defined at large scale" or "coordinate-independent". The usual trick to check that statement is to show that the component functions of the quantity under different coordinates can be transformed *smoothly* (since we have restricted our attention on the smooth manifold).

>**Definition (compatibility)**: Two atlases $\\{(U_i,\phi_i)\\}$ and $\\{(V_j,\psi_j)\\}$ are compatible if $\forall U_i\cap V_j\neq \emptyset$, $(U_i,\phi_i)$ and $(V_j,\psi_j)$ are $C^\infty$-connected.

We can easily check that compatibility is an equivalence relation and gives equivalence classes. The equivalence class given by an atlas $\\{(U_i,\phi_i)\\}$ is called a **differentiable structure**.

>**Claim**: Given an atlas $\mathcal{A_0}$ on $M$, there exists a unique differentiable structure $\mathcal{A}$ such that $\mathcal{A_0}\in \mathcal{A}$.

Before going to examples, let's see more classifications of manifolds.

So far, our definition of manifold is based on the homeomophism between the coordinate neighborhood and the Euclidean space $\mathbb{R}^n$. In some cases, however, this turns out to be too restrictive. Therefore we now introduce the idea of *manifold with a boundary* whose coordinate neighborhood is homeomorphic to the half space $\mathbb{H}^n$.

Besides, we have *orientations* in Euclidean space and we even assigned orientation to simplexes. We naturally hope that the notion of orientation is inherited by differential manifolds.

>**Definition (half space)**: $\mathbb{H}^n$ is a half space in $\mathbb{R}^n$ 
>$$\mathbb{H}^n\equiv \\{(x^1,x^2,\cdots, x^n)\in \mathbb{R}^n: x^n\geq 0\\}$$

We have induced topology for $H^n$ and we can further define the boundary of $H^n$ as
$$\partial \mathbb{H}^n\equiv \\{(x^1,x^2,\cdots,x^n)\in \mathbb{R}^n: x^n=0\\}$$
and the interior of $H^n$
$$\text{Int}\mathbb{H}^n=\mathbb{H}^n-\partial \mathbb{H}^n$$

>**Definition (manifold with a boundary)**: A Hausdorff toopological space $M$ is an $n$-dim manifold with a boundary if 
> 1. $\\{U_\alpha)\\}$ is a cover of $M$.
> 2. Given an atlas $\\{U_\alpha,\phi_\alpha)\\}$, where $U_\alpha$ is an open set of $M$, $\phi_\alpha$ is a diffeomorphism from $U_\alpha$ to a subset of $\mathbb{H}^n$. $\forall U_\alpha\cap U_\beta\neq \emptyset$, $\phi_\alpha\circ\phi_\beta^{-1}$ and $\phi_\beta\circ\phi_\alpha^{-1}$ are smooth functions.

Obviously, the first definition of this chapter is actually contained in this definition. And for such a manifold with a boundary, we can actually identify its *boundary* as
$$\partial M\equiv \\{p\in M:\exists (U,\phi)\in \mathcal{A}, \text{s.t. }p\in U, \phi(p)\in\partial \mathbb{H}^n\\}$$
and *interior*
$$\text{Int}M\equiv M-\partial M$$

It is interesting to note that $\partial M$ is an $(n-1)$-dim manifold without boundaries.

>**Definition (orientation)**: Given a vector space $V$ and two different basis sets $\\{\delta_i\\}$ and $\\{e_i\\}$, satisfying
>$$e_i=\sum_{j=1}^n a_i^j \delta_j$$
>where $\text{det }a_i^j\neq 0$, and we define $\\{e_i\\}\sim\\{\delta_i\\}$ if $\text{det }a_i^j>0$. The equivalence class under the equivalence relation "$\sim$" is called an *orientation*. Denote an orientation as $\lambda$, if $a_i^j<0$, then this orientation is denoted by $-\lambda$.

>**Definition (orientable manifolds)**: An $n$-dim manifold $M$ along with its atlas $\\{(U_\alpha,\phi_\alpha)\\}$ is orientable if when $U_\alpha\cap U_\beta\neq\emptyset$. The transformation
>$$\phi_\beta\circ\phi_\alpha^{-1}:\phi_\alpha(U_\alpha\cap U_\beta)\to\phi_\beta(U_\alpha\cap U_\beta)$$
>has a positive Jacobian, i.e.
>$$\text{det }\left(\frac{\partial (\phi_\beta\circ\phi_\alpha^{-1})^i}{\partial x_\alpha^j}\right)>0$$

The orientation of an orientable manifold is then defined as the differentiable structure given by orientation-compatible atlases.

### 5.1.2 Examples

#### Euclidean space

The Euclidean space $\mathbb{R}^n$ is the most trivial example of a manifold. We can simply take the coordinate function to be the identity map and choose a single chart that includes the whole space.

#### Loop $S^1$

It requires at least two charts to cover the space $S^1$, we can choose $\phi_1$ and $\phi_2$ as example 5.2.

#### The $n$-dim Sphere $S^n$

The trick is actually similar.

#### Real Projective Plane $\mathbb{R}P^n$ and Grassmann Manifold

We can write the real projective plane $\mathbb{R}P^n$ as $\mathbb{R}P^n\equiv (\mathbb{R}^{n+1}-\\{0\\})/\sim$. Where $\sim$ is an equivalence relation defined as $x\sim y$ if $x=ay$, where $a\in \mathbb{R}-\\{0\\}$. Since $\mathbb{R}P^n$ is an $n$-dim manifold, the **homogeneous coordinates** $(x^0,x^1,\cdots,x^n)$ are not good coordinates. We introduce the **inhomogeneous coordinates** on $U_i\equiv\\{(x^0,x^1,\cdots,x^n):x^i\neq0\\}$:
$$\xi_{(i)}^j\equiv x^j/x^i$$
Thus
$$\xi_{(i)}\equiv(\xi_{i}^0,\xi_{i}^1,\cdots,\xi_{i}^{i-1},\xi_{i}^{i+1},\cdots,\xi_{i}^n)$$
The coordinate functions follow 
$$\phi_i: (x^0,\cdots,x^n)\to(x^0/x^i,\cdots,x^{i-1}/x^i,x^{i+1}/x^i,\cdots,x^n)$$

Now let us check a more general case: the **Grassmann manifold**.

>**Definition (Grassmann manifold)**: Given an $n$-dim vector space $\mathbb{R}^n$. All $k$-dim subspaces of $\mathbb{R}^n$ form a set, denoted by $G_{k,n}(\mathbb{R})$. Obviously, a real projective plane $\mathbb{R}P^n$ is $G_{1,n}(\mathbb{R})$.

To be rigorous, we actually need to define the **quotient topology** in the presence of the equivalence relation $\sim$ here, defined by
$\bar{A}\sim A$ if $\bar{A}=gA$ where $g\in \text{GL}(k,\mathbb{R})$ and $A$ and $\bar{A}$ are $k\times n$-dim matrices or $\bar{A},A\in M_{k,n}(\mathbb{R})$. By this equivalence relation, Grassmann manifold can be expressed as $G_{k,n}(\mathbb{R})=M_{k,n}(\mathbb{R})/\text{GL}(k,\mathbb{R})$. Now, we just try to find a way to construct charts on the Grassmann manifold.

Similar to the case of real projective plane, write an element of $M_{k,n}(\mathbb{R})$ as $A=(A_1,\widetilde{A_1})$ where $A_1$ is a nondegenerate minor, and $\widetilde{A_1}$ is a $k\times (n-k)$ matrix. We take the representation
$$A^{-1}_1\cdot A=(I_k,A_{1}^{-1}\cdot \widetilde{A_1})$$
There are $k(n-k)$ remaining degrees of freedom. Then $\text{dim}G_{k,n}(\mathbb{R})=k(n-k)$.



>**Definition (product manifold)**: $M\times N$ is a **product manifold** whose atlas is $\\{U_i\times V_j),(\phi_i,\psi_j)\\}$.

#### Torus

Use the idea of product manifold.
